hello so we're up to chapter 4 today
before I begin someone asked if I'd be
doing video similar to these but for
people who haven't read the book and the
answer I suppose is no because that's
the purpose of the book if you haven't
bought the book if you haven't read the
book then I think that people should buy
the book and maybe this can help you to
understand some of the parts I often
find it far better to have someone to
discuss ideas with I know there's people
out there that maybe aren't surrounded
by others who are interested in
philosophical discussions and so maybe
Diskin serve as a sort of support for
that this is to help people to
understand the book it's an extremely
dense book it's probably one of the most
fascinating broad-ranging deep books
that have ever been written and so it is
helpful to have someone else I think to
bounce ideas off and so if you hear
someone else reading it and commenting
on it that can help but as for people
who haven't read the book at all and
just wanting to spread the ideas out
there certainly that's great if people
do that but I'm not gonna provide a
summary I guess of the book if you want
people can buy the book to get the
summary at the end of every chapter is
indeed a summary of that chapter so if
that's all you wanted to do that would
be a great way of at least getting an
overview of the joy Qian worldview for
wonderful better word so up to chapter
four today
chapter four is called creation I find
that it's essentially in two parts the
first part is very much about biological
knowledge and how it comes into being
and its impact upon what is
neo-darwinism or just evolution by
natural selection there's another way of
putting that and the second part is
really about fine-tuning which is
something I'm very interested in I'm
fascinated by this concept of the
fine-tuning of the physical constants of
nature there's been a number of books
written specifically on that topic over
the years and David has a section here
in Chapter four and he makes a good
contribution to the corpus of knowledge
that's been written there some
interesting philosophical ideas so in
chapter 4 we do find that there are many
misconceptions about how stuff in
general is created that people have
become subject to over the years of
trying to understand the appearance of
design in nature these misconceptions
pervade not only biological evolution
but other kinds of creation like
knowledge creation for example which has
a bearing on the psychology of learning
how it is our minds learn so in Chapter
four David does go through the usual
Dawkins and Harris and Hitchens the
atheist objections to creationism but he
does something a little bit deeper he
goes more fundamental than just the
biological so in all cases he's trying
to understand how the knowledge has
become instantiated where it is in all
cases he's trying to understand how the
knowledge has been created there from my
perspective it's only possible for
knowledge to be created in one broad way
and I'm going to be a little bit lazy
with the synonyms here but essentially
the idea is that you have a conjecture
which is a mutation of some existing
idea or some existing trial in the case
of biological organisms possibly an
adaptation or a change a mutation of a
gene in particular so this conjecture or
this mutation is iterated with criticism
or selection so this has a bearing on
also bucket series of mind which are
still operative everywhere and it shows
how alternative epistemology is are
false the spontaneous generation of
anything that is sufficiently
complicated is false and that's usually
the error that's at the heart of any of
these attempts to understand how it is
that knowledge has come to be
instantiated where it is so in the case
of biological evolution and biological
knowledge the issue there is that we
cannot have spontaneous generation of
life as we will see because that would
presume that the knowledge somehow
come from nowhere creationists will say
it's come from God but then we merely
have to ask the question how did God get
the knowledge and if he always had the
knowledge then that doesn't solve any
problems we may as well say that nature
already had the knowledge there
similarly bucket theories of mind are
spontaneous generation theories of how
we learn so someone who sits in a
classroom and passively is supposed to
be the recipient of the knowledge passed
on by the teacher or through reading a
book is a spontaneous generation concept
that merely by virtue of the empty
vessel remaining in a room and someone
pouring knowledge into the empty vessel
that a person can learn they won't
because they need to conjecture the
knowledge themselves first and just as a
related point this will only happen if
they're interested in what they're
hearing or if they have some other kind
of motivation but really they need
interest any other kind of motivation
that you try and give them as probably
going to be immoral for example if you
say you'll be punished if you don't gain
this knowledge and this is why I
continue to argue that IQ is really an
interest quotient it just tells people
how interested an individual happens to
be in doing the kind of tasks associated
with intelligence test so-called
intelligence tests really what we have
is a class of tasks questions kinds of
knowledge that people value and that yes
sure
might help you to be successful out
there in the world but some people
aren't interested in that kind of thing
it doesn't mean that their brains are
any less capable of doing certain tasks
it means they're not interested in doing
certain tasks but this is taking us so
far afield saying it's a little afield
from the central points in Chapter four
so let me get into the reading and into
also at this point I thank people for
the emails that have been coming in I've
been enjoying responding to those
they're great so chapter four creation
I'll start from the beginning and read
until I think it's time to comment he
writes the knowledge in human brains and
the knowledge in biological adaptations
are both created by evolution in the
broad sense the variation of
information alternating with selection
in the case of human knowledge the
variation is by conjecture and the
selection is by criticism and experiment
in the biosphere the variation consists
of mutations random changes in genes and
natural selection favors the variance
that most improve the ability of their
organisms to reproduce thus causing
those variant genes to spread through
the population and natural selection
favors the variance that most improve
the ability of their organisms to
reproduce thus causing those variant
genes to spread through the population
that a gene is adapted to a given
function means that few if any small
changes would improve its ability to
perform that function some changes might
make no practical difference to that
ability but most of those that did would
make it worse in other words good
adaptations like good explanations are
distinguished by being hard to vary
while still fulfilling their functions
this is me speaking now the concept of
hard to vary discovered by David Deutsch
the improvement beyond popper applies
equally here to biological evolution as
it does to epistemology back to the book
human brains and DNA molecules each have
many functions but among other things
they are general-purpose information
storage media they are in principle
capable of storing any kind of
information moreover the two types of
information they respectively evolved to
store have a property of cosmic
significance in common once they are
physically embodied in a suitable
environment they tend to cause
themselves to remain so such information
which I call knowledge is very unlikely
to come into existence other than
through the error correcting process of
evolution or thought my commentary here
now that is so crucial to understand
there's a lot being packed into there as
always what we learn there is a new way
of viewing knowledge knowledge being
this kind of entity that once it is
appeared in a particular environment it
will tend to cause itself to remain in
that environment
it will copy itself we will replicate
itself it has this kind of robust
capacity to avoid the usual vagaries of
physical forces a rock once it comes out
of a volcano or via whatever process
that produces the rock isn't able to
cause itself to remain in existence it's
subject to erosion it will disappear
eventually typical species of organisms
will tend to go extinct over time as the
environment changes very little has the
property in physical reality of tending
to cause itself to remain in existence
one struggles to think of something else
that tends to cause itself to remain
physically embodied in the environment
so we have this concept of tending to
cause itself to remain in the
environment over time once embodied
there in a suitable environment they
tend to encourse themselves to remain so
and the other thing is that knowledge
cannot come into existence other than
through this process of evolution or
thought so the two kinds of knowledge
they're there's biological type
knowledge that arrives on the scene due
to evolution by natural selection the
process of variation and selection all
through thought the products of minds
that people have and that process is
conjecture and criticism or conjecture
and refutation as popper would say my
commentary over let's continue reading
there are also important differences
between those two kinds of knowledge one
is that biological knowledge is non
explanatory and therefore has limited
range the explanatory human knowledge
can have broad or even unlimited reach
another difference is that mutations are
random while conjectures can be
constructed intentionally for a purpose
nevertheless the two kinds of knowledge
share enough of their underlying logic
for the theory of evolution to be highly
relevant to human knowledge in
particular some historic misconceptions
about biological evolution have
counterparts in misconceptions about
human knowledge so in this chapter I
shall describe some of those
misconceptions in a
to the actual explanation of biological
adaptations namely modern Darwinian
evolutionary theory sometimes known as
neo-darwinism now there's a subtitle and
it says creationism creationism is the
idea that some supernatural being or
beings designed and created all
biological adaptations in other words
the gods did it as explained in Chapter
one theories of that form are bad
explanations unless supplemented by hard
very specifics they do not even address
the problem just as the laws of physics
did it will never win you a Nobel Prize
and the Kandra did it does not solve the
mystery of the conjuring trick before a
conjuring trick has ever performed its
explanation must be known to the person
who invented it the origin of that
knowledge is the origin of the trick
similarly the problem of explaining the
biosphere is that of explaining how the
knowledge embody in its adaptations
caused possibly have been created in
particular a putative designer of any
organism must also have created the
knowledge of how that organism works
creationism thus faces an inherent
dilemma is the designer a purely
supernatural being one who is just
they're complete with all that knowledge
or not a being who was just there would
serve no explanatory purpose in regard
to the biosphere since then one could
more economically say that the biosphere
itself just happened complete with that
same knowledge embodied in organisms on
the other hand to whatever extent a
creationist theory provides explanations
about how supernatural beings design and
created the biosphere they are no longer
supernatural beings but merely unseen
ones they might for instance be an
extraterrestrial civilization but then
the theory is not really creationism
unless it proposes that the
extra-terrestrial designers themselves
had supernatural designers now there's a
section about the idea that surely if
there was a supernatural designer they
would have made things as good as
possible especially if it's a benevolent
designer and an omniscient designer and
David uses the famous example of so in
mammalian eyes for example in human eyes
what you've got is an ice where the
light-sensitive part has its blood
supply
the wiring the nerves in front of the
light-sensitive cells so they're
blocking some of the light it didn't
have to be this way in other animals
it's not and because the wiring the
blood supply is in the front of the
retina you then have to have a system
where all those wires and those in and
all those blood vessels have to get back
to the brain so what I have to do is to
dive in through the retina through what
is the optical blind spot back to the
brain so via the optic nerve back to the
visual cortex
this is a terrible design ok no engineer
would come up with this no intelligent
designer would come up with this
I believe the octopus has an eye where
all of the wiring is at the back and so
there's no degradation of the light
coming in to their retinas so evolution
was able to get it right in one sense
but not right in the other stuff it was
an intelligent designer I don't know why
he preferred octopuses to mammals David
actually says squids yes there's also
sections here about vestigial features
things like the appendix may or may not
have a function in human beings it seems
to be a degraded seekin as far as I
remember David talks about the fact that
we need vitamin C and yet many other
animals have genes for vitamin C that
work but our gene for vitamin C doesn't
work so we have to go ahead and get our
vitamin C from plant material that seems
to be a bad design and it seems to be
not a very benevolent thing for a an
all-powerful God to do to give us
features that generally cause us harm
yet again the appendix or the tonsils
are a pretty good example these are
things that often have to be operated on
in human beings and removed without too
much harm
so why they're still there well they're
vestigial they're left over from our
evolutionary ancestors that's the end of
my commentary let's and persevere with
the book the central floor of
creationism that its account of how the
knowledge and a patient's could possibly
be created is either missing
supernatural or illogical is also the
central floor of pre-enlightenment
authoritative conceptions of human
knowledge in some versions it is
literally the same theory in certain
types of knowledge such as cosmology or
moral knowledge and other rules of
behavior being spoken to
humans by supernatural beings in other's
parochial features of society such as
the existence of monarchs and government
or indeed the existence of God in the
universe are protected by taboos or
taken so uncritically for granted that
they are not even recognized as ideas
and I shall discuss the evolution of
such ideas in institutions in chapter 15
so I'm skipping quite a bit now there's
a long section on spontaneous generation
which was the attempt early on by people
to try and explain how it is that
biological organisms arose out of
nonliving material should say we don't
have a full explanation yet or even any
explanation as to how inorganic material
becomes self-replicating there must be a
natural process that allows it but it's
an open question it can't in any case be
spontaneous generation which is the idea
that you can leave alone a bunch of
nonliving stuff and eventually it will
simply become a complicated organism for
what it's worth they're trying to
replicate the early conditions of the
earth in miller-urey type experiments
the miller-urey experiment was this
attempt to take a whole bunch of
inorganic material carbon dioxide
methane oxygen nitrogen etc put it in a
flask with some water heated up shoot
electricity through it leave it for a
little while and see what happens at the
end and I think initially in the first
few iterations of the experiment anyway
people were extremely excited about the
fact that they ended up producing amino
acids of course amino acids aren't life
amino acids aren't life any more then a
pile of bricks is the Sydney Opera House
if someone said to you I'm doing some
important work I'm building the Sydney
Opera House and you say to them
show me your progress and I say sure no
worries and they show you a brick this
is hardly evidence that they're well on
their way to building the Sydney Opera
House in a similar way miller-urey type
experiments at least the early ones I
haven't kept up with it but the early
ones were able to produce some very
simple organic molecules things like
amino acids
maybe they produce simple proteins I
don't know they certainly didn't produce
nucleic acids and they didn't they
haven't yet produced anything that is
self-replicating so it's an interesting
open question as to how easy it is for
inorganic material given our laws of
physics to organize itself into
self-replicating molecules how that
happens and how easy it is we don't know
the miller-urey experiment seems to
suggest it might be difficult there are
other kinds of ways of approaching the
problem for example looking at the
geology of the early Earth if you look
at the geology of the early Earth what
you find is that life arose here on
planet Earth as soon as the conditions
were even marginally okay for life to
arise you know it was very soon after
the earth solidified on that surface so
it was very very hot completely in
hostile you know some thousands of
degrees Celsius on the earth very early
on but as soon as it cooled down the
life appeared and you can find this in
geology the question then from geology
is well it seems like it rose as quickly
as it possibly could here on earth which
would suggest that it's rather easy for
life to arise we don't know it's it's a
it's a simple example a B&E very hard
but the fact that it arose quickly on
earth is interesting in light of the
fact that the smartest biologists
working for a long time now haven't been
able to replicate the process in the lab
ok I'm going to read the section now
which is on page 83 and it's titled the
argument from design the argument from
design has been used for millennia as
one of the classic proofs of the
existence of God as follows some aspects
of the world appear to have been
designed but they were not designed by
humans since design requires a designer
they must therefore be a god as I said
that is a bad explanation because it
does not address how the knowledge of
how to create such designs could
possibly have been created who designed
the designer and so on but the argument
from design can be used in valid ways to
and indeed its earliest known use by the
ancient Athenian philosopher Socrates
was valid the issue was given
but gods have created the world do they
care what happens in it
Socrates pupil arista Dimas had argued
that they do not another pupil the
historian Xenophon recalled Socrates
reply Socrates
because our eyes are delicate they have
been shuttered with eyelids that open
when we have occasion to use them and
our foreheads have been fringed with
eyebrows to prevent damage from the
sweat of the head and the mouth set
close to the eyes and nostrils as a
portal of ingress for all our suppliers
whereas since matter passing out of the
body is unpleasant the outlets are
directed hind woods as far away from the
senses as possible I ask you when you
see all these things constructed with
such show of fall sight can you doubt
whether there are products of chance or
design Arista Dimas certainly not viewed
in this light they seem very much like
the contrivances of some wives craftsmen
full of love for all living things
Socrates and what of the implanting of
the instinct to procreate and in the
mother the instinct to rear her young
and in the young the intense desire to
live and the fear of death
mr. Danis these provisions to seem like
the contrivances of someone who has
determined that there shall be living
creatures but my commentary on that
before I go back to the book this is
where I suppose our Richard Dawkins or
any other evolutionary biologist hood
would jump in rightly and say that this
is a false dichotomy where Socrates says
can you doubt whether our products of
chance or design and so he's he's
meaning they're the exclusive or it has
to be one or the other and of course we
know that it is neither of those things
now I can't so this is a trap that many
people fall into they can only see two
options and so therefore they conclude
there are only two options but your lack
of imagination is not a refutation of
the possibility that you're wrong so
let's go back to the let's go back to
the text Socrates was right to point out
that the appearance of design and living
things is something that needs to be
explained it cannot be the product
chance and that is specifically because
it signals the
of knowledge how was that knowledge
created however Socrates never stated
what constitutes an appearance of design
and why do crystals and rainbows have it
does the Sun or summer how are they
different from biological adaptations
such as eyebrows the issue of what
exactly needs to be explained in an
appearance of design was first addressed
by the clergyman William Paley the
finest exponent of the argument from
design in 1802 before Darwin was born he
published the following thought
experiment in his book natural theology
he imagined walking across a heath and
finding a stone or alternatively a watch
in either case he imagined wondering how
the object came to exist and he
explained why the watch would require a
wholly different kind of explanation
from that of the stone for all he knew
he said the stone might have lain there
forever
today we know more about the history of
the earth so we should refer instead to
supernovae transmutation and the Earth's
cooling crusts but that would make no
difference to Paley's argument his point
was that sort of account can explain how
the stone came to exist or the raw
materials for the watch but it could
never explain the watch itself a watch
could not have been lying there forever
nor could it have formed during the
solidification of the earth
unlike the stone or a rainbow or a
crystal it could not have assembled
itself by spontaneous generation from
its raw materials nor could it be our
raw material but why not exactly asked
Paley why should not this answer sir for
the watch as well for the stone why is
it not as admissible in the second case
as in the first and he knew why because
the watch not only serves a purpose it
is adapted to that purpose Paley wrote
quote for this reason and for no other
vis that when we come to inspect the
watch we perceive what we could not
discover in the stone that its several
parts are framed and put together for a
purpose for example they are so formed
and adjusted as to produce motion and
that motion so regulated as to point out
the hour of the day end quote
back to the book one cannot explain why
the watch is as it is without referring
to its purpose of keeping accurate time
like the telescope's are discussed in
Chapter two
it is a rare configuration of matter
skipping a little so people must have
designed that watch Paley was of course
implying that all of this is even more
true of a living organism say Emmaus
it's several parts are all constructed
and appear to be designed for a purpose
for instance the lens is in its eyes
have a purpose similar to that of a
telescope the focusing light to form an
image on its retina which in turn has
the purpose of recognizing food danger
and so on actually Paley did not know
the overall purpose of the mouse that we
do now see neo-darwinism which were
about to come to but even a single eye
would suffice to make Paley's triumphant
point namely that the evidence of
apparent design for a purpose is not
only that the parts all serve a purpose
but they were but if they were slightly
altered they would serve it less well or
not at all a good design is hard to vary
quote if the different parts had been
differently shaped from what they are of
a different size from what they are or
placed after any other manner or in any
other order than that which they are
placed either no motion at all would
have been carried on in the machine or
none which would have answered the use
that is now served by it end quote so
david says here this is my commentary
here david says here that the knowledge
there has come to be embedded in the
watch it's also embedded in the mouse as
well and so now I'll go back to the book
you're right so how did all that
knowledge come to be embodied in those
things as I said Paley can conceive of
only one explanation that was his first
mistake quote the inference we think is
inevitable that the watch must have had
a maker they cannot be designed without
a designer contrivance without a
contriver Auto that choice arrangement
without anything capable of arranging
sub servants II in relation to a purpose
without which without that which could
in tender purr
us means suitable to an end without the
end having ever been contemplated or the
means accommodated to it arrangement
disposition of parts subservience e of
means to an end
relation of instruments to a use imply
the presence of intelligence and mind we
now end quote
back to the book we now know that they
can be designed without a designer
knowledge without a person who created
it some types of knowledge can be
created by evolution I shall come to
that shortly but it is no criticism of
Paley that he was unaware of a discovery
that had yet to be made one of the
greatest discoveries in the history of
science
so David then goes on to speak about how
Paley understood the problem even if he
didn't realize the solution and that the
solution contained the problem because
his solution was of course there's an
ultimate designer so if you find a watch
then you're right to conclude that there
must have been a designer and Paley
argued well therefore if you find a
mouse than a mouse if must have had a
design because the mouse is even more
complicated than what the watch is so
therefore God exists but it doesn't
actually solve the problem because this
ultimate designer itself must have had a
maker this is an objection that's been
raised many many times by many many
different people and David admits that
this isn't a proof of the non-existence
of God it just shows that that
particular argument for God is a bad one
and then we move on to Lamarckism
again I'm not going to read the entire
section here interesting though it is so
I'm just gonna skip to the main points
and so now we're getting it to
Lamarckism I'm gonna skip over a lot of
it David's writing about the first
attempts to try and understand how it is
that biological organisms seem
well-suited to the environments in which
they're found David writes during the
early years of the 19th century the
naturalist jean-baptiste Lamarck
proposed an answer that is now known as
Lamarckism it's key idea is that
improvements acquired by an organism
during its lifetime can be inherited by
its offspring the mark was thinking
mainly of improvements in the organisms
organs limbs and so on such as for
instance the enlargement and
strengthening of muscles that an
individual uses heavily
and the weakening of those that it
seldom does skipping a little the
Lamarckian explanation of giraffes is
that when eating leaves from trees whose
lower-lying leaves were already eaten
stretch their necks to get at the higher
ones this supposedly lengthened their
next slightly and then their offspring
inherited that trait of having slightly
longer necks thus over many generations
long neck giraffes evolved from
ancestors with unremarkable necks in
addition Lamarck proposed that
improvements were driven by a tendency
built into the laws of nature towards
ever greater complexity the latter is a
fudge for not just any complexity could
account for the evolution of adaptations
it has to be knowledge and so that part
of the theory is just invoking
spontaneous generation and explain
knowledge
Lamarque might not have minded that
because like many think it's Abbie's day
he took the existence of spontaneous
generation for granted so I'll pause
there there are all sorts of problems
with the mark ISM but this makes me
think of another misconception people
have about evolution that it's directed
towards ever greater complexity what
kind of complexity were never really
told but people have this notion that
perhaps it's moving towards greater
complexity in forms of more intelligence
or bigger brains something like that and
so people often think that evolution is
directed towards creating more
intelligent species and so in our
evolutionary history when we look back
there was some other kind of hominid
that had a slightly smaller brain and
before that as a shorter smaller brained
hominid and so on stretching back to
some kind of ape thing and then perhaps
to some kind of monkey thing and then to
some other kind of simple mammal and
then some other kind of amphibian thing
and some other kind of fish thing the
brains get smaller and smaller and
smaller so it appears as though from our
perspective looking back that evolution
has led to us so why shouldn't we find
aliens out there that have big brains
surely if it's happened here on earth
it'll happen somewhere else out there as
well now there are many many problems
with this argument but I just want to
consider the giraffe room and if you've
got an anthropomorphic giraffe and the
anthropomorphic giraffe is able to
contemplate its own exist
since in evolutionary history it might
look back at its ancestors and noticed
that all of those have had slightly
shorter necks that became longer and
longer and longer culminating in a
really long neck so then the question
becomes for a giraffe that's interested
in astrobiology should we expect out
there in the universe
to find other things with really long
necks after all if it happened here on
earth it'll happen elsewhere out there
but when you look around here on the
earth at all the species that are alive
today you don't find many with long
necks maybe you can consider certain
kinds of dinosaurs so maybe it's a
possibility but it's not like it's a
convergent feature of evolution
typically not many species have long
necks with humans it's even worse it's
even worse it doesn't seem like any
other species perhaps had the
intelligence that we did perhaps there
were there might have been the amethyst
or cro-magnon man or something like that
but I would guess that all of these kind
of hominids actually had an intelligent
common ancestor and so that intelligent
common ancestor that's the thing that
I'm interested in finding out whether or
not there might have been independent
big-brained general-purpose explainers
out there this argument by the way is
due to charles lineweaver Charlie
lineweaver who's an astrophysicist
astrobiologists of the Australian
National University and he calls that
the Planet of the Apes hypothesis and he
actually uses the example of an elephant
and the lengths of trunks and he does a
good statistical analysis of long trunk
things over time and if you look at the
lengths of trunks leading to elephants
you might very well conclude that this
is what evolution is about is about
making ever longer trunks but that is
simply confirmation bias from the
perspective of an elephant and so
perhaps we have a similar kind of
confirmation bias when it comes to human
beings we're the only species we know of
that is intelligent that's alive today
so if we go looking out there into outer
space for intelligent aliens we might be
sorely disappointed they my
not be any out there even if the entire
cosmos is filled with with bacteria
covered planets none of them might
evolve intelligence there's more to say
on that I'll leave it for another time
back to the text I'm skipping a lot more
now David writes the fundamental error
being made milah mark has the same logic
as inductive ISM both assume that new
knowledge adaptations and scientific
theories respectively is somehow already
present in experience or can be derived
mechanically from experience but the
truth is always that knowledge must
first be conjectured and then tested
that is what Darwin's theory says first
random mutations happen they do not take
account of what problem is being solved
then natural selection discards the
variant genes that are less good at
causing themselves to be present again
in future generations okay so now we get
to the section subtitled neo-darwinism
and I'm gonna read a fairly lengthy bit
here because I think it's very
instructive to get the David Deutsch
perspective on neo-darwinism okay so
David writes the central idea of
neo-darwinism is that evolution favours
the genes that spread best through the
population there is much more to this
idea than meets the eye as I shall
explain a common misconception about
Darwinian evolution is that it maximizes
the good of the species that provides a
plausible but false explanation of
apparently our truest TB havior in
nature such as parents risking their
lives to protect their young or the
strongest animals going to the perimeter
of a herd under attack thereby
decreasing their own chances of having a
long and pleasant life or further
offspring thus it is said evolution
optimizes the good of the species not
the individual but in reality evolution
optimizes neither to see why consider
this thought experiment imagine an
island on which the total number of
birds of a particular species will be
maximized if they nested at say the
beginning of April the explanation for
why a particular date is optimal will
refer to various trade-offs involving
factors such as temperature the
prevalence of predators the availability
of food and nesting materials and so on
suppose that initially the whole
population has genes that cause them to
nest
at that optimum time that would mean
those jeans well adapted to maximizing
the maxim that would mean that those
jeans were well adapted to maximizing
the number of birds in the population
which one might call maximizing the good
of the species now suppose that this
equilibrium is disturbed by the advent
of a mutant gene in a single bird which
causes it to nest slightly earlier say
at the end of March assume that when a
bird has built a nest the species other
behavioral genes are such that it
automatically gets whatever cooperation
it needs from a mate that pair of birds
would then be guaranteed the best
nesting site on the island an advantage
which in terms of the survival of their
offspring might well outweigh all the
slight disadvantages of nesting earlier
in that case in the following generation
there will be more March nesting birds
and again all of them will find
excellent nesting sites that means that
a smaller population than usual of the
April nesting variety or find good
science the best science will have been
taken by the time they start looking in
subsequent generations the balance of
the population will keep shifting
towards the March nesting variants if
the relative advantage of having the
best nesting sites is large enough the
april nesting variant could even become
extinct if it arises again as a mutation
its holder will have no offspring
because all sites will have been taken
by the time it tries to nest
that's the original situation that we
imagined with jeans that were optimally
adapted to maximizing the population
benefiting the species is unstable
there will be evolutionary pressure to
make the genes become less well adapted
to that function
this changes harmed the species in the
sense of reducing its total population
because the birds are no longer nesting
at the optimum time am i thereby also
have harmed it by increasing the risk of
extinction making it less likely to
spread to other habitats and so on so on
optimally adapted species may in this
way evolve into one that is less
well-off
by any measure okay so I'll just pause
there this is a powerful way of
explaining the selfish gene ID
that Richard Dawkins popularized so this
idea of The Selfish Gene stands in stark
contrast to other people who argue for
group selection or even species
selection I think Stephen Jay Gould was
one of the most famous proponents that
argued against Dawkins when it came to
this concept of The Selfish Gene here
David is using this thought experiment
about a bird that is that a that for the
best of the species the bird should be
nesting sometime in April it's good
weather and you know there's lots of
food and so on but if there was a
mutation in the gene that controls when
a bird nests such that the bird didn't
nest in April which is optimum for the
bird but instead started nesting in
March then the birds would find there
are more nesting sites especially if
there's a limited number of nesting
sites and so if the mutant gene causes
the bird an individual bird to start
nesting earlier then that bird might
have offspring which was more likely to
survive because there's less competitors
at that time so do I've got birds
outside right now making noise so what
can happen then is that those particular
birds have an advantage over the ones
that are nesting in April which are
competing for food and so on and so the
ones in March are able to have more
offspring and so if these birds start
nesting earlier namely in March sometime
then by the time the April birds come
around decide to nest
perhaps so this this bird okay let's say
it's able to find a mate pretty quickly
which has a random mutation in the gene
that causes it to nest such that it
nests in March instead of April will
have offspring that will also have that
variant of the gene and because in March
if they're nesting in March and they're
not competing with other birds then the
offspring are likely to survive more
easily because the parents aren't
competing for nests with other birds so
they have offspring we
themselves had the Varian and so it goes
on and so you end up with this situation
where the birds are nesting during march
which is not optimal for the species and
indeed when the april nesting bird
decide to nest in april all the nests
are taken by the birds that have nested
in march and this isn't good for the
species because the optimal time by the
terms of the thought experiment is april
that's where all the food is that's
where just the ideal conditions are
March is not ideal but the gene itself
the gene has been successful and it's
pushed away the gene that was useful for
the species in favor of the selfishness
of the gene itself the gene itself is
the thing that has persisted and it
could cause the species of April nesting
birds to go extinct and then you'd
essentially have kind of a new species
you'd have March nesting species which
in the long run the March nesting
species probably wouldn't be wouldn't
thrive as well and they wouldn't thrive
as well because that's not the optimum
time for these particular bird species
to nest I'll keep reading so back to the
book if a further mutant gene then
appears causing nesting still earlier in
March the same process may be repeated
with the earlier nesting Jane's taking
over and the total population falling
again evolution will thus drive the
nesting time ever earlier and the
population lower a new equilibrium would
be reached only when the advantage to an
individual birds offspring of getting
the very best nesting site was finally
outweighed by the disadvantages are
slightly earlier nesting bad equilibrium
might be very far from what was optimal
for their species
a related misconception is that
evolution is always adaptive that it
always constitutes progress or at least
some sort of improvement in useful
functionality which it then acts to
optimize this is often summed up in a
phrase due to the philosopher Herbert
Spencer and unfortunately taken up by
Darwin himself the survival of the
fittest but
as the above thought experiment
illustrates that is not the case either
not only has the species been harmed by
this evolutionary change every
individual bird has been harmed as well
the birds using any particular site now
have a harsher life than before because
they are using it earlier in the year
skipping a little what exactly has the
evolution of those birds achieved during
that period it is optimized not the
function of adaptation of a variant gene
to its environment the attribute that
would have impressed Paley but the
relative ability of the surviving
variant to spread through the population
and Apryl nesting gene is no longer able
to propagate itself to the next
generation even though it is
functionally the best variant the early
nesting gene that replaced it may still
be tolerably functional but it is
fittest for nothing except preventing
variants of itself from procreating from
the point of view of both the species
and all its members the change brought
about by this period of evolution has
been disaster but evolution does not
care about that it favors only the genes
that spread through the population so
again my commentary here now wonderfully
succinct very well explains what the
process of evolution by natural
selection is in terms of genetic
selection it's not about which species
will survive it's not about group
selection it never is it's about genes
surviving ok skipping a little end back
to the text David writes is it sheer
luck then that most genes do usually
confer some Albert less than optimal
functional benefits on their species and
on their individual holders no organisms
are the slaves or tools the genes used
to achieve their purpose of spreading
themselves through the population that
is the purpose that Paley and even
Darwin never guessed genes gain
advantages over each other in part by
keeping their slaves alive and healthy
just as human slave owners did slave
owners were not working for the benefit
of their workers of their workforces
nor for the benefit of individual slaves
it was solely to achieve their own
objectives that they fed and housed
they're slaves and indeed force them to
reproduce genes do much the same thing
in addition there is the phenomenon of
reach when the knowledge in a gene
happens to have reach it will help the
individual to help itself in a wider
range of circumstances and by more than
the spreading of the gene strictly
requires that is one mules stay alive
even though they are sterile so it is
not surprising that jeans usually confer
some benefits on their species and its
members and do often succeed in
increasing their own absolute numbers
nor should it be surprising that they
sometimes do the opposite
but what genes are adapted to what they
do better than almost any variant of
themselves has nothing to do with the
species or the individuals or even their
own survival in the long run it is
getting themselves replicated more than
rival genes now we move directly to the
next section which is an especially
David Deutsch take on neo-darwinism so
he's taking the work of Richard Dawkins
step further David writes he's called
the section neo-darwinism and knowledge
and writes neo-darwinism does not refer
at its fundamental level to anything
biological it is based on the idea of a
replicator anything that contributes
causally to its own copying for instance
a gene conferring the ability to digest
a certain type of food causes the
organism to remain healthy in some
situations where it would otherwise
weekend or die hence it increases the
organisms chances of having offspring in
the future and those offspring would
inherit and spread copies of the gene
ideas can be replicators too for example
a good joke is a replicator when lodged
in a person's mind it has a tendency to
cause that person to tell it to other
people
thus copying it into their minds dawkins
coined the term memes ron's would drain
dreams for ideas that are replicators
most ideas are not replicators they do
not cause us to convey them to other
people
nearly all long lasting ideas however
such as languages scientific theories
and religious beliefs and the ineffable
states of mind that constitute cultures
such as being British or the skill of
performing classical music and
names all mean plexus collections of
interacting memes I shall say more about
this in chapter 15 the most general way
of stating the central assertion of the
neo-darwinian theory of evolution is
that a population of replicators subject
to variation for instance by imperfect
copying will be taken over by those
variants that are better than their
rivals causing themselves to be
replicated this is a surprisingly deep
truth which is commonly criticized
either being too obvious to be worth
stating or for being false the reason I
think is that although it is
self-evidently true it is not
self-evident Lee the explanation of
specific adaptations our intuition
prefers explanations in terms of
functional purpose what does a gene do
for its holder or for its species but we
have just seen that genes generally do
not optimize such functionality so the
knowledge embodied in genes is knowledge
of how to get themselves replicated at
the expense of their rivals genes often
do this by imparting useful
functionality to their organism and in
those cases their knowledge incidentally
includes knowledge about that
functionality functionality in turn is
achieved by encoding into genes
regularities in the environment and
sometimes even rule of thumb
approximations to laws of knowledge in
which case the genes are incidentally
encoding that knowledge too but the core
of the explanation for the presence of a
gene is always that it got itself
replicated more than its rival genes non
explanatory human knowledge can also
evolve in an analogous way rules of
thumb are not passed on perfectly to the
next generation of users and the ones
that survive in the long run are not
necessarily the ones that optimize the
extensible function for instance a rule
that is expressed in an elegant rhyme
may be remembered and repeated better
than one that is more accurate but
expressed in ungainly prose also no
human knowledge is entirely non
explanatory there is always at least a
background of assumptions about reality
against which the meaning of a rule of
thumb is understood and that background
can make some false rules of thumb seem
plausible explanatory theories evolved
through our more complicated mechanism
accidental errors in transmission and
memory still play a role but a much
smaller
that is because good explanations are
hard to vary even without being tested
and hence random errors in the
transmission of a good explanation are
easier for the receiver to detect and
correct the most important source of
variation explanatory theories is
creativity
for instance when people are trying to
understand an idea that they hear from
others they typically understand it to
mean what makes most sense to them or
what they are most expecting to hear or
what they fear to hear and so on those
meanings are conjectured by the listener
or reader and may differ from what the
speaker or writer intended in addition
people often try to improve explanations
even when they have received them
accurately they make creative amendments
spurred on by their own criticism if
they then pass the explanation on to
others they usually try to pass on what
they consider to be the improved version
so this is one of those sections where I
really need to pause embedded amongst
the rest of the text which is grade is
this real gem I don't know that Papa
spent much time trying to explain the
psychology of learning but here David
really has gone to the heart of the
matter he's brought to bear preparing an
epistemology to the process of learning
people are not taking this seriously
very interested in the question about
how people learn or trying to maximize
learning let's say so I never going to
make a habit of rereading things after
all people can just rewind the video but
this is so important I think I need to
emphasize it again
so David's talking about understanding
we may as well say learning here so let
me just read let me just read those very
few sentences again because they're very
dense they have this amazing idea he
writes when people are trying to
understand an idea that they hear from
others so for example from a lecturer or
from a teacher or from a parent or from
a friend you're just trying to
understand something how is it that you
learn well what he says he is that
people typically understand that the
listener typically understand it the
thing that they're trying to learn they
typically understand it to mean what
makes most sense to them or what they
are most expecting to hear
or what they fear to hear and so on okay
so it could be any number of things you
have these expectations about what
you're about to hear and that's what you
understand you can't just gain
understanding from the message that's
coming to you you have to bring your
understanding to the message those
meanings are conjectured by the listener
or reader and may differ from what the
speaker or writer intended so you're
trying to teach someone something you're
trying to help someone learn in some way
it's not a matter of you speaking ever
more clearly or ever more loudly or it's
not a matter of your intentions of what
you're expecting the person to learn
it's a matter of what they're expecting
to hear which is a profound idea people
often try to improve explanations even
when they have received them accurately
they make creative amendments spurred by
their own criticism I've personally
experienced this a lot that I can
explain something and the listener does
a far better job than I could ever have
done in explaining that particular
concept because they've understood it in
a way that is very different to what I
understand it and their way is more
parsimonious their way is free of the
kind of errors that are always bringing
to my explanation so it's absolutely
true it's the expectations of the person
that's doing the learning that shapes
what it is they understand a particular
concept to be you can't pass on the
concept you can only really pass on the
message you can attempt to transmit but
the receiver is the thing that's doing
the error correction yeah I'm gonna
continue reading but he's about to speak
but to write a little bit more about a
little bit more about understanding but
just to link that last paragraph with
the next one it does really seem to me
to be the case that when people try and
understand each other
what each other is saying that
if I use certain words in perfect
English and you are a perfectly fluent
English speaker as well that what you
hear might be a certain set of words
which go into your ears converted into
electrical signals passed into your
brain then into your mind what your mind
then does is an absolute mystery for the
most part but your way of viewing the
world even though we're using exactly
the same language could be vastly
different though what you understand
certain words to actually mean could be
quite different to what I understand
them to mean and so an active
translation goes on that when I use a
word which labels a particular concept
although you understand the word it
could label it and ever so slightly
different or perhaps a completely
different concept in your mind and so
then when you respond to me you're
responding to the concept you understand
the word to label and so when I hear
your response I'm assuming that the
words that you're using now which could
be exactly the same word that I've just
used in conveying something to you is
actually labeling a different concept
than the one that I thought it was
labeling so as popper would say you
cannot speak in such a way as to not be
misunderstood everyone could be speaking
precisely the same language perfectly
accurately perfectly fluently but still
talking about different things even
though you're they're using the same
words I don't know how common this is
but I do think it's an important problem
that we have in attempting to understand
each other human beings are mysterious
as Jaron Lanier would say we're infinite
wills of mystery you can just keep on
discovering more and more and more about
people and we don't seem to get to the
end I think problems are soluble but I
do think he has a point here that
because of creativity and creativity is
kind of this infinite thing with
infinite reach that perhaps
understanding someone else just like
perfectly understanding anything it's
impossible but in particular
understanding something with arguably
infinite complexity like a human mind is
even more
challenging but exciting as well
continue
unlike jeans many memes take different
physical forms every time they are
replicated people rarely express ideas
in exactly the same words in which they
heard them they also translate from one
language to another and between spoken
and written language and so on yet we
rightly call what is transmitted the
same idea the same meme throughout thus
in the case of most memes the real
replicator is abstract it is the
knowledge itself this is in principle
true of genes as well
biotechnology routinely transcribed
genes into the memories of computers
where they are stored in a different
physical form those records could be
translated back into DNA strands and
implanted in different animals the only
reason this is not yet a common practice
is it as easier to copy the original
gene but one day the genes of a rare
species could survive its extinction by
causing themselves to be stored on the
computer and then implanted into a cell
over different species
I say causing themselves to be stored
because the biotechnologists would not
be recording information
indiscriminately but only information
have met a certain criterion such as
gene of endangered species the ability
to interest biotechnologists in this way
would then be part of the reach of the
knowledge in those genes
so both human knowledge and biological
adaptations are abstract replicators
forms of information which once they are
embodied an unsuitable physical system
tend to remain so while most variants of
them do not the fact that the principles
of neo Darwinists theory are from a
certain perspective self-evident has
itself been used as a criticism over
theory for instance if the theory must
be true
how can it be testable one reply often
attributed to Haldane is that the whole
theory would be refuted by the discovery
of a single fossilized rabbit in a
Stratton of Cambrian rock however that
is misleading the import of such an
observation would depend on what
explanations were available under the
given circumstances for instance
misidentifications of fossils and of
strata have sometimes been made and
would have to be ruled out by good
explanations before one could call the
discovery a fossilized rabbit in
Cambrian rock
even given such explanations what would
have been ruled out by the rabbit would
not be the theory of evolution itself
but only the prevailing theory of the
history of life and geological processes
on earth suppose for instance that there
was a prehistoric continent isolated
from the others on which evolution
happened several times as fast as
elsewhere and that by convergent
evolution a rabbit-like creature of all
their during the Cambrian era and
suppose the continents were later
connected by a catastrophe that
obliterated most of the life-forms on
that continent and submerged their
fossils the rabbit-like creature was a
rare survivor which became extinct soon
afterwards given the supposed evidence
that is still an infinitely better
explanation then for instance
creationism or Lamarckism neither of
which gives any account of the origin of
the apparent knowledge in the rabbit so
what would refute the Darwinian theory
of evolution evidence which in the light
of the best available explanation
implies knowledge came into existence in
a different way for instance if an
organism was observed to undergo only or
mainly favorable mutations as predicted
by Lamarckism or spontaneous generation
then Darwinism is random variation
postulate would be refuted
if organisms were observed to be born
with new complex adaptations for
anything of which there were no
precursors in their parents then the
gradual change prediction would be
refuted and so would Darwinism z'
mechanism of knowledge creation if an
organism was born with a complex
adaptation that a survival value today
yet was not favored by selection
pressure in its ancestry say an ability
to detect and use Internet weather
forecasts to decide when to hibernate
then Darwinism would again be refuted a
fundamentally new explanation would be
needed facing more or less the same
unsolved problem the pelan Darwin faced
we should have to set about finding an
explanation that worked ok so this is
this some might think it's a
controversial point I don't know I don't
know that it matters I make a big deal
as many people interested in philosophy
of science do about the line of
demarcation between science and non
science when it comes to this question
about neo-darwinism Darwinism broadly
speaking and whether or not it's
falsifiable
given that david has just said well
rabbits in the Precambrian would not
falsify the theory and then ask the
question well what would well evidence
that would suggest that you only ever
had favourable adaptations so that's
possible but some people still argue
that well perhaps it's just this thing
called a research framework so you know
some people argue about whether or not
the theory of evolution by natural
selection
Darwinism neo-darwinism whether it's a
scientific theory or actually something
deeper than a scientific theory
sometimes called a research program now
I don't think it really matters
ultimately whether it's the framework
within which we do biology or whether it
is a scientific explanation subject to
the usual test the usual experimental
test that we can perform on any
scientific theory just so happens
coincidentally I'm reading a book by the
philosopher and or by a biology
philosopher Michaelis Michael a
professor at Michaelis Michael at
University of New South Wales here in
Australia he's written a book just
recently called evolution by natural
selection confidence evidence in the gap
now Michaelis has a few problems with
Papa and with falsification ISM and and
indeed to some extent is a proponent of
Stephen Jay Gould view good to read
people who you disagree with but I just
wanted to take a moment just to read his
section here of his book it's subtitled
is evolutionary theory falsifiable so
let me just read what Michaelis has
written he writes the question we
started with is is evolutionary theory
science takes on a per period guys as is
evolutionary theory falsifiable but this
is too coarse grain to be answered there
are many different evolutionary theories
we're thinking it's can consider and we
can ask of each of them whether it is
falsifiable
so Michaelis has claimed is that the
different evolutionary theories might be
considered to be is the theory that
evolution has taken place falsifiable is
the theory that the human chin evolved
falsifiable is the theory that evolution
has involved natural selection for
survival is the theory that the human
chin evolved through natural selection
falsifiable the theory that evolution
has taken place is a historical theory
it says that the biological world has
evolved it says that the biological
world has changed over time is it
falsifiable to before sapphire ball is
to be able to specify an observation
that would refute the theory it might be
thought that this would not be
falsifiable however a moment's
reflection should convince you that you
can imagine possible evidence that would
refute the theory that evolution has
taken place in this case it is easy to
find such a piece of possible evidence
what the fossil record never revealed
any changes were the fossil record to be
just like the present organisms then the
theory that there has been biological
evolution would be falsified in fact the
fossil record does show that at
different times the biological world has
been exemplified by different organisms
therefore this theory is in fact
falsifiable we can specify refuting
observations that would have led to the
theory being rejected the observations
did not take place but that does not
mean the theory is not falsifiable but
only that it is not yet falsified what
about the theory that the human jinn
evolved is falsifiable this theory is
also a historical theory it says that at
one time organisms existed with no chins
and that later descendants had Chin's
there are issues were deciding which
types of organism are ancestral to which
but one thing we could predict to have
seen in the fossil record that would
lead to this theory being rejected is if
all species in the lineage allied with
the hominin lineage had chins indeed we
could have falsifying evidence were
Chin's to be found in the hominid
lineage regardless of whether they are
directly ancestral to our species just
as we might say there have been changes
to the heart in humans were we to find
that humans evolved features or
structures novel to their hearts we do
not say that the heart evolved in humans
when all vertebrates had hearts so the
theory that the chin evolved in humans
is falsifiable
again there are observations we could
have observed that would have told
against that theory it is important to
note that saying that a theory is
falsifiable does not mean that if it
were false then there would in fact be
some observable evidence that tells you
this here
is false there may be many circumstances
in which you cannot tell whether a
particular theory is false and only a
few in which you can tell the theory is
false such a theory is nevertheless
still falsifiable what about the theory
that natural selection has been involved
in evolution this is a historical theory
once again it is about what happened in
the past but it is not just about what
happened it is about why what happened
happened
saying that something evolved by natural
selection involves identifying the
mechanism that drove that change is that
visible is it important to see that it
is not visible in fact there is a
general issue with causation what we
aspire to in science is more than just a
catalog of what happened when although
finding out what happened when is often
hard enough in scientific endeavors we
do try to discern why things happened
the causal explanations
since Hume we have known that this is
very difficult we see constant
conjunctions easily but finding
causation is much more difficult or
rather getting clearer what we need to
establish to have established the causal
link is the difficult question one idea
coming from human self is about what
happens when we manipulate the system
Hume famously gives two versions of the
nature of causation the first is
entirely empirical it is just that a
causes be when a type events are
constantly conjoined with B type events
and a and B are spatially are temporally
contiguous and we come to expect B when
we perceive a the second account
involves can a factual sense just that a
causes B if they are spatio-temporal E
contiguous and manipulating a
manipulates B therefore were a not to
occur then B would not either exploring
the science metaphysics and epistemology
of causation is not a small topic it may
be enough to say that finding the
constant conjunctions is hard enough in
science finding causal relations is
harder still however here a strange fact
needs to be highlighted this theory that
we have this theory that we have decided
is not falsifiable is in fact that
conclusion of Darwin's key argument for
natural selection Darwin argued for this
conclusion from two premises that we saw
our empirical and falsifiable the first
that there is an excess of young
relative to breeding individuals the
second is that there is variation and
that the variations are heritable each
of these was empirically testable even
in Darwin's day and his evidence for
both was was copious
darlin also used another premise that
amounted to an analytic claim if any
variations help their bearers in the
struggle for existence then these were
bitter and have a higher tendency to
survive from these three together with a
law of large numbers type hidden'
premise he derived the conclusion that
natural selection would have taken place
okay so that's what Michaelis Michel
from Sydney happens to say about
evolution by natural selection and
whether or not it's falsifiable of
course I would have some issues with the
way he's presented what causation is
there
it sounds inductive us to me
nevertheless as he admits there is a
there's really a problem there with
trying to understand this concept of
causation he does admit that science is
very much about explanation I don't know
if he's aware of what hard to very is
about the book is an interesting one
there's a lot there about falsification
in science as I say I don't necessarily
agree with it all
nevertheless it's it's it's very
interesting if you can get hold of the
book it's it it's not it's not a very
long book it's a hundred and forty
something pages but going back to the
beginning of infinity now the next
section is about fine-tuning and I'll
leave that until next time but what was
really interesting here in this part is
the symmetry between the way in which
human knowledge is constructed
especially explanatory knowledge via
this process of conjecture and
refutation or guessing in criticism of
the creation creativity and criticism
and biological evolution where you have
random mutations and then selection of
those or variation in selection they
mirror one another not exactly the same
in particular the kind of mechanisms
that allow us to create explanatory
knowledge are intelligently designed
people have Minds they have intentions
they have free will and so they were
able to choose amongst different ways in
which they might improve knowledge at
this idea of um creativity of the
ability to create explanatory knowledge
has I think a deep connection to the
concept of free will and whether or not
we have free will even given determinism
because the growth of knowledge is
inherently unpredictable and we don't
know what problems are going to come
next so we don't know where we're going
to direct our minds I think that's where
we're late for today I look forward to
the next part
it's um about fine tuning as I've
already said and perhaps in a few days
possibly a week I'll be able to get to
that Cielo
[Music]